during World War II, However, the development of syntactic theory, language and parsing algorithms in the 1950s was not sufficient to create an efficient MT system. The first notable work outside mainstream NLP was Winograd's SHRDLU thesis at MIT in 1971.. One such method is Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA), which uses a mathematical technique called Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) to identify the underlying structure and relationships between words and sentences in a corpus. In this approach, a neural network is trained on a corpus of articles and then modified using feature fusion to create a summary with highly ranked sentences. In addition to the methods mentioned previously, other techniques have also been developed for extractive summarization. This approach uses a general statistical method as its base and further applies fuzzy logic to decide on the importance of the text. The selection of fuzzy rules and membership functions plays a major role in the performanceof this approachTextsummarization using seq2seqmodel in 2016,, where an attentional encoder decoder, Recurrent Neural Networks, which was actually established for machine translation, outperformed other models and shown a state-of- the-art performance among other models developed at that point of time. Fig 1.1: Feature-rich-encoder functionality of a seq-2-seq RNN model. Fig 1.2: The heatmap represents a soft alignment between the input and summary Text. summarization is one of the important applications of Natural language processing(NLP)Henceinordertounderstandthehistoryoftextsummarizationitis required to also take a look at the history of NLP. It was during 1980s and 1990s that NLP started gaining interest as a topic for research, and many developments in this field were kickstarted during this time. (ElaineMarsh). The term-frequency is calculated and represented as TF value is used as term weight. “Abstract generation method”, implemented by Edmundson, which uses a combination of term frequency and other features like Cue method, Title method, Location, to calculate the weightage of sentence. Hidden Markov Models and Clustering method. one such system is “BREVIDOC full-text retrievalsystem”which wasbasedonRhetoricalStructureTheory (RST)It consistsof a Document structure analyser, which performs document organization analysis, sentence analysis, text structure analysis, which extracts rhetorical relation between sentencesandthensemanticroleextractionwithwordindexing. Many developments were happening in parallel. The fuzzy logic system consists of four components: fuzzifier, an inference engine, de-fuzzifier and the fuzzy knowledgebase.