The views expressed here are his own and not those of his employer. He has also worked with the Centre for Policy Research, New Delhi, and the National Knowledge Commission, Government of India. Survival  |  vol. It is also defined by contrasting polities and models of devel- opment, with the parties silently competing not just for capital, resources  and markets, but also for legitimacy in the arena of great and emerging global powers. After Bandung, the emerging competition between India and China contributed to an increasingly strained bilateral relationship that India and  China could  not share the  leadership  mantle for long140  |  David M. Malone and Rohan Mukherjee was soon put to the test in addressing a serious irritant: the Sino-Indian  border. A critical test of China’s new approach was the Kargil conflict between India and Pakistan in 1999, during  which Beijing assured Indian Foreign Minister Jaswant Singh of its neutral- ity. Nonetheless, high-level visits continued. Irritants continue to plague the relationship, however, particularly where  the border is concerned. Krishna sought to calm by announcing that India would  henceforth raise funds for that state internally.26  The current dynamic Underlying many views of the Sino-Indian relationship is the notion that two rising powers with rapidly growing economies and global ambitions cannot peacefully co-exist at such close quarters. 33 This lever is not often used,  however. However, the top 25 exports of China and India in 2004 were almost entirely non-overlapping, and India  has excelled mainly at trade in services in the recent past, suggesting that  China’s trade impact on India will be less pronounced than some have pre-dicted. 51 China’s leaders are acutely aware of the dangers that await  should the patriotism of their citizens become ‘virulent ultranationalism’.52  Contemporary Indian politics and foreign policy evince a similar prag- matic strain, though occasional Indian stridency in multilateral forums  stands in contrast to China’s more targeted and restrained interventions.53  India is not as convinced of its historical uniqueness as it once was, and prefers to cast itself officially as an ordinary if significant nation tending to the imperatives of its economic development rather than a country obsessed  by the quest for great-power status. 59 Only modest academic attention has been paid in India to  China, especially compared to Chinese efforts to understand India.60  As a result, the modern history of Sino-Indian relations has been less  about China and India than it has been about extraneous actors such as the United States, the Soviet Union and Pakistan, and multilaterally managed  issues such as non-proliferation and climate change. The Indian border, however, remains conten- tious and a continuing source of ill will between the two nations.65 Initial  formulations by Zhou Enlai in the 1950s had envisaged a quid pro quo settlement whereby India would drop its claims in the western sector in exchange for China’s concession of the eastern sector. For China, India’s recognition of Tibet as part of China seems grudging and condi-tional. And its role as host of the Dalai Lama and his ‘splittist clique’, to use Beijing’s colourful phrase, could appear to some Chinese as a threat to  their country’s cohesion. 73–8. 9 Mohan Guruswamy and Zorawar Daulet Singh, India China Relations: The  Border Issue and Beyond  (New Delhi:  Viva Books, 2009), p. 38. 10 P.C. Mukhopadhyay, 1961). 11 John W. Garver, ‘China’s Decision for  War with India in 1962’, undated, pp. 9–10, http://www.people.fas.harvard. edu/~johnston/garver.pdf. 15 Ashley Tellis, quoted in Susan L.  Shirk, ‘One-Sided Rivalry: China’s  Perceptions and Policies toward 156  |  David M. Malone and Rohan Mukherjee India’, in Frankel and Harding (eds),  The India–China Relationship, p. 79. 33 Garver, Protracted Contest, p. 75. 38 M.K. 11–12. ), Chinese Foreign Policy  in Transition (Hawthorne, NY: Aldine  de Gruyter, Inc., 2004), p. 387. 1, Spring 2000, pp. 53 On the performance of India’s com - merce minister during Doha Round discussions in 2008, see Paul Blustein,  Misadventures of the Most Favoured  Nations: Clashing Egos, Inflated  Ambitions, and the Great Shambles of  the World Trade System (New York:  PublicAffairs, 2009), pp. 219–84. 55 C. Raja Mohan, ‘The Middle Path’,  Indian Express, 30 September 2009,  http://www.indianexpress.com/news/the-middle-path/522993/. 30, no.