CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
SUMMARY OF FINDINGS
In this study, we compared how well different physiological variables can be used to assess workload in (simulated) real time for a
single individual, when the amount of body movement and visual
information are controlled for. We also examined to what extent
(different ways of) combining information leads to better classification performance, as well as whether taking time into account
improves performance.
Classification models based on data from each of the three sensor groups perform above chance (distinguishing high from low
workload) at a 0.01 significance level, where EEG reached around
86% classification accuracy and classification models based on
peripheral physiology and eye-related variables reached between
70 and 75% accuracy. As hypothesized, the difference in classification accuracy between models based on EEG variables on
the one hand, and models based on peripheral physiology and
eye-related variables on the other hand was statistically significant. The best performing single variable was ERP at Pz with
88% accuracy (elastic net). All EEG variables (except power in
the theta band measured at Fz) performed well above chance (p <
0.01). The only non-EEG variables exceeding the 0.01 chance level
were respiration frequency (69% accuracy) and pupil size (75%
accuracy).
As hypothesized, combining variables recorded using a single
sensor (i.e., only the EEG electrodes, electrode Pz, skin conductance electrodes, respiration belt, ECG electrodes or eye camera) does not significantly improve performance over the best
Frontiers in Neuroscience | Neuroprosthetics October 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 322 | 10
Hogervorst et al. Workload from EEG, physiology, and eye signals
FIGURE 4 | Classification performance in the default condition (2- vs.
0-back, 120 s) for the different sensor types and using all available
input. The striped bars show the effect of adding the time feature.
Conventions as in Figure 1.
performing single variable from that sensor. Variables from the
same sensor are likely highly correlated and, in our experiment,
combining them has no added value. For four out of the six
sensors the trend was even that performance worsened when
combining data.
Combining variables of the three physiological sensors (skin
conductance electrodes, respiration belt and ECG electrodes)
resulted in a modest, non-significant improvement to around
75% classification accuracy with respect to the best performing single physiological sensor (respiration—around 70%). In
contrast to what we expected, combining EEG with another sensor group (physiology and eyes) does not lead to a significant
improvement in classification accuracy over EEG alone. Using
elastic net, we only found non-significant trends of better performance for EEG combined with eye data (91% accuracy) and EEG
combined with physiology (89%) than EEG alone (86% accuracy). Adding physiology to fused EEG and eye data does not
further improve, or tend to improve, performance. Analysis of
data from shorter time segments or smaller workload differences
indicates that the fact that we did not get a stronger, significant
improvement of adding physiological or eye data to EEG is not
caused by a ceiling effect.
Fusion of variables by concatenating feature vectors could not
be improved by fusing variables at the decision level. The latter
approach results in a more balanced weighting of the different
indicators compensating for the low number of features from
physiological and eye-based variables relative to EEG, and could
therefore have improved classification. As it turned out, the variables that may have profited of the decision level approach, i.e.,
physiological and eye data, performed lower than EEG variables.
Giving more weight to variables with a lower performance is
not necessarily beneficial. In addition, classification models based
on concatenation may be making more optimal use of interactions between variables that are missed when fusion occurs at the
decision level.
Including the time of measurement relative to the start of
the experiment as a parameter leads to statistically significant
improvements of up to 9% for physiological variables. Adding
time did not significantly improve performance of classifiers
based on EEG, eye-related variables or combinations of variables.
The latter cannot be attributed to a ceiling effect, as indicated by
analysis of data from shorter time segments or smaller workload
differences.
COMBINATION OF INFORMATION
The notion that combining physiological variables that reflect a
certain mental state will result in a more accurate assessment of
this mental state compared to using these variables on their own
seems very sensible and has frequently been suggested in the literature as a potential way to improve mental state assessment.
However, we are not aware of studies that tried this and showed
a statistically reliable and strong improvement. A few studies
explicitly mention that combination of physiological information did not result in reliable improvement (e.g., Christensen
et al., 2012; Coffey et al., 2012; Severens et al., 2013) or only to
a modest degree in one of multiple conditions (Brouwer et al.,
2012). Other studies report that classification performance of
models combining information increases classification accuracy
(by a small amount) but do not provide statistical evidence to
show that the effect is reliable (e.g., Chanel et al., 2009). We had
anticipated that our study could provide clear evidence for the
benefit of combination given the nature of workload, which is
a mental state that involves multiple processes that are presumably reflected by different types of physiological variables (e.g.,
cognitive processes by EEG and arousal by peripheral physiological measures). Also, while most studies combine information by
fusion at the feature level, we thought that fusion of information
at the decision level could have contributed to finding a strong
reliable advantage of combining information. However, we did
not find significant differences between the two methods, with
the overall trend indicating worse rather than better performance
for fusion at the decision. The fact that with this study, there is
still no evidence of large benefits when combining physiological variables reflecting workload suggests that they are too highly
related to gain a benefit of combination. It could be the case that
meta-analyses or a study such as ours including more participants
would turn non-significant trends of fusion benefits into statistically significant effects. However, if present at all, the effects of
data fusion are at least small. Also, it may be the case that for
other tasks (perhaps involving more strong emotional processing besides cognitive processes) benefits of feature fusion can be
found more easily.
WORKLOAD ASSESSMENT PERFORMANCE
Classification accuracy for distinguishing 2-min segments of high
vs. low workload for a single individual is relatively high (with an
www.frontiersin.org October 2014 | Volume 8 | Article 322 | 11
Hogervorst et al. Workload from EEG, physiology, and eye signals
average over participants up to 91%), especially when considering
the fact that the amount of movements and visual information was the same across workload levels, and that classification
simulated a real time situation.
When the duration of to be classified data segments was
decreased to 30 s, this resulted in a relatively small decrease in
performance, of on average 5% (elastic net) to 8% (SVM). The
results further show that discrimination between more subtle differences in workload is possible as well. These results are good
news for potential use in applications. Another finding that is useful for practical applications is that performance based on a single
Pz-channel was found to be comparable to that of a model using
all EEG-channels. This means that in our case a single channel
suffices to characterize the EEG.
As reported, we found EEG variables to be most informative
when assessing workload. However, we also found pupil size and
blink rate to reflect workload. This is interesting given the fact
that lighting conditions and visual input were strictly controlled
in our experiment. These results thus indicate that not only pupil
size but also blink rate is affected by mental workload level apart
from visual demands.
GROUP vs. INDIVIDUAL LEVEL
In the present study, we examine how well different variables
can be used to assess workload in real time for a single individual by training classification models on different types of
information and comparing performance. Sensitivity of physiological variables is often examined using group level analyses (e.g.,
using repeated measures ANOVAs). However, for various reasons
(see Introduction) one cannot draw straightforward conclusions
about assessing workload on an individual level from the results
on a group level. For instance, in the current study we found
that classification models based on heart rate performed badly,
while, for basically the same set of data, this variable was found
to be among the ones most strongly associated with workload
in a repeated measures ANOVA (Brouwer et al., 2014). Brouwer
et al. (2014) also found that heart rate strongly decreased over
the time course of the experiment. Since we presented workload
conditions in 2-min segments equally dispersed over time, even
strong time effects are averaged out in repeated measure ANOVAs
whereas they could overrule the comparatively small workload
effects in classification type of analyses, especially when classification models are trained on data acquired at the start of the experiment and tested on data at the end. Thus, caution should be taken
when generalizing results from studies using group level analysis
to situations where momentary data of individuals is used.
NOISE AND CONFOUNDS IN REAL LIFE
In real-life, out-of-the-lab situations, the presence of factors like
body movement and varying light conditions may act as noise,
therewith diminishing the value of certain variables (e.g., pupil
size). Also, levels of workload can be confounded with different levels of stimulus processing or motor actions. For example,
workload in Air Traffic Control may be confounded by speech,
where controllers talking more during high than during low
workload situations. Such confounds may affect physiology (e.g.,
speech affects respiration), resulting in improved classification
accuracy. One of the reasons for the fact that we only found a
minor improvement in performance by fusing different workload
measures may have been that the experiment controlled for many
of such confounding factors, thus decreasing the additional benefit of recording various physiological measures. In this way we
were better able to determine which factors directly reflect mental
workload. However, in practical situations, physiological measures may supply information about the context and contribute
to workload assessment in a more indirect way, i.e., via the
confounds. In such a case one should determine whether physiological measures are the most convenient measures to supply
workload information, or whether task or behavioral measures
(such as the detection of speech through audio sensors with
respect to our previous ATC example) are more suitable.